Evaluation the global food trade system and its association with climate 


The global food system is a coupled human and natural system. The geographical locations of food production and consumption are becoming more disconnected and food for millions of people is being produced with land and water resources located in other countries.  Crops trade is an important human adaptation that interacts with food security and resource scarcity. It enables the spatial decoupling of agricultural production and consumption which facilitates global food security. Furthermore, it will increase the physical availability of food at global and local levels. The connections in the global trade networks have increased tremendously during the last recent years. Multiple variables such as food shortfalls, export ban, burgeoning population, weather extremes, economic crisis, and political issues (i.e. sanctions, civil unrest, social strife), energy shortages and price volatility can impact global food trade and lead to food trade disruptions that among these variables weather extremes are. Understanding the dynamic of global food trade network is essential. In addition, climate change is postulated to cause more weather extremes in the future and the ensuing damage to crops from heat waves, drought, and flooding are predicted to be significant.  Climate change may heighten uncertainties throughout the food chain, crop yields, trade systems and the ability to feed nine billion people in the future. Climatic patterns may cause different impacts globally changes temperature and precipitation in some regions in a way that blooms agriculture and at the same time it may induce severe droughts and causes crops failure in other regions. Hence, understating the dynamic of the global food trade network and its association with climate is very essential.  
In this project I aim to use trade flow data set of wheat, as the most important staple crop, during the last several decades to investigate network characteristics including its homogeneity, complexity and variability and changes in connectivity among global wheat producers.  In addition, I will use climatic data set (such as drought index and land surface temperature) to identify the countries whose wheat productivity were impacted by climate tremendously during the last several decades (Robust Principal Component Analysis will be used to find the association between climate and wheat yield).  So not only I will investigate the dynamic of wheat trade, but I will study any association between trade dynamic and climate. 
As a preliminary result, Figure 1 shows global extreme droughts (drought is identified by an index called PDSI, negative PDSI shows drought conditions) over croplands in 2012.  Wheat trade are shown by pink lines, while wheat trade flows between major wheat exporters are shown by purple lines. Extreme droughts (PDSI<-3) hit many croplands around the world in 2012. Canada and USA, unlike Australia, experienced extreme drought in 2012. It is possible that this drought formed/interrupted some trade links. This complex system of climatic pattern and trade make it increasingly necessary to gain knowledge about the impacts of climatic patterns on crops and trade in order to cope with plausible severe conditions while minimizing financial losses. This is especially crucial now, considering that society has been largely ineffective in coping with recent shocks so far. 
In Figure 2 I showed the first principal component (PC) of the association between drought and wheat productivity across global countries. It is clear that the US, Europe, China etc. were impacted by drought during the last several decades (see the small black dots across croplands). We need to investigate if drought in these countries impacted wheat trade network. This project tries to enhance the knowledge of the global food security field, which is of relevance to policy initiatives, decision makers, water and energy managers, government and non-government organizations, insurance companies and stakeholders.
 


